He is famously the object and not the subject of a Bible account.
We easily sympathize with him because we can understand his emotions and feelings at the time.
Yet his response is that which provides a powerful life lesson in our service to God.
We're introduced to him in the book of Mark chapter 14.
Mark chapter 14 beginning in verse 50.
Verse 50 picks up the account of Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane.
And we read of the 11 faithful apostles and they all abandoned him and fled.
However, a certain young man wearing only a fine linen garment over his naked body began to follow him nearby
and they tried to seize him, but he left his linen garment behind and got away naked.
The young man in this verse is understood to be John Mark.
And notice John Mark's outstanding quality.
When the apostles all fled, it says John Mark followed nearby.
What tremendous courage of this young man.
While the great man, the apostles fled, Mark stayed and he followed nearby.
Now, interestingly, we know that Peter eventually also followed,
but notice this about Peter in verse 54, but Peter from a good distance followed.
John Mark followed nearby.
In this, we see not only the courage of John Mark, but we also see his devotion to Jesus.
To what extent he knew Jesus or had interactions with Jesus, we don't know.
But he did have some and his devotion and courage for his master is unquestionable here.
The scriptures also describe Mark.
John Mark has a strengthening aid and a great comfort.
Those were the observations of him later in his life.
And we do know from the scriptures that John Mark worked in the background
for some very big personalities, the Apostle Paul, the Apostle Peter and Barnabas.
John Mark initially caught the attention of the apostles of Paul and Barnabas
when he was in Jerusalem.
Paul or Saul at the time and Barnabas came there in 46 CE.
And they took John Mark with them to the exciting assignment of Antioch
where Christianity was beginning to flourish and John Mark was brought along with them.
Later in the year 47, John Mark is selected to go with Barnabas and Saul
on the first missionary tour.
It's described for us in the book of Acts chapter 13.
In Acts chapter 13, verses 4 and 5, it says,
So these men, that is Barnabas and Saul, sent out by Holy Spirit,
went down to Salusia and from there they sailed away to Cyprus.
When they arrived in Salamis, they began proclaiming the word of God
and the synagogues of the Jews.
They also had John as an attendant.
John Mark.
He is described here as an attendant, the footnote says an assistant.
The writer of Acts uses a very interesting word here for attendant
and it's a Greek word that literally means an under-roar.
An under-roar was a man who worked below the decks on a large Roman naval vessel.
He would be below deck.
He would have to row in unison in cooperation with his fellow rowers
and he would have to follow the pace set by the captain.
Why would this term be used for John Mark in this instance?
Well, the clue comes from verse 4 where it says they sailed away to Cyprus.
So the metaphor of an under-roar now takes on greater meaning.
Incidentally, the same term is used by the Apostle Paul
when he refers to himself as a servant of God or an attendant
in 1 Corinthians chapter 4.
Why would that be significant?
Why use it in 1 Corinthians?
Because in one of the bays next to Corinth,
the large ships of the Roman navy took port there
and so again the metaphor of the under-roar would take on great meaning.
Well, the infamous event occurred in Acts chapter 15,
the event which Barnabas or a part of me, John Mark was an object of.
Notice in Acts chapter 15, beginning in verse 37 it says,
Barnabas was determined to take along John who was called Mark.
Paul, however, was not in favor of taking him along with them,
seeing that he had departed from them in Pamphilia
and had not gone with them to the work.
At this, there was a sharp burst of anger
so that they separated from each other
and Barnabas took Mark along and sailed away to Cyprus.
Denied an opportunity, denied a privilege.
What does Mark do?
It says he sailed away with Barnabas to Cyprus.
Mark kept active in Jehovah's service.
How does he do that?
Paul, pardon me, John Mark was not so concerned about a lost privilege
that he failed to appreciate the opportunities that were in front of him.
Well, while he's sailing away and working,
what's Paul doing?
Verse 41, 40 and 41 say Paul selected Silas.
41 says he went through Syria and Salisia strengthening the congregations.
Now, as you carry on in chapter 16, we find him arriving in Derbe and Listera.
And verse 3, pardon me, verse 1 says he met Timothy, a disciple.
Verse 3, what happens?
Paul expressed a desire for Timothy to join him.
Mark's replacement.
Interestingly, as Paul now begins to travel with Timothy,
we find that the Apostle Paul writes to the Thessalonians within a year.
And in 1 Thessalonians 1 verse 1, Paul's greeting is from Paul, Silas, and Timothy.
2 Thessalonians, 2 from Paul, Silas, and Timothy.
I wonder how Timothy's, pardon me, I wonder how Mark's feeling at this point.
Five years later, he writes to the Corinthians, and again, now it's from Paul and Timothy.
During all this time where Timothy is rising, what's Mark doing?
He's rowing.
Mark is continually faithfully serving Jehovah 11 years later in the year 60 to 61
when Paul was in Rome, who was with him?
John Mark.
And when Paul wrote letters to various congregations, he describes John Mark.
In fact, in one of the letters in sending greetings, this is in Colossians,
he makes reference to the fact that he had wanted to send John Mark
as a personal representative to the congregations.
And that indicates to us what kind of man Mark was and what reputation he had.
A personal representative was someone who was deeply trusted
and he would have to represent Paul before the congregations that he would visit.
That is the reputation of John Mark.
You know, there's no record in the scriptures of the challenges that John Mark faced
in his ministry.
There's no shipwrecks, no beatings, no hunger, no left for dead for John Mark,
but there is one challenge that he faced that is shared with us.
And that is his difficulty or the challenge with the Apostle Paul, his brother.
And yet clearly, there were no hard feelings between these two men,
even though there was a difference.
In fact, Paul's final words chronologically in the book of 2 Timothy chapter 4
in reference to John Mark, he tells Timothy,
bring Mark, he's helpful, the underroer, John Mark.
Interestingly, for all that we know about Timothy,
there are no words recorded of Timothy's in the scriptures.
And yet, John Mark wrote a gospel.
And as a typical underroer, he never mentioned his name.
So when we put the pieces together of what is shared of John Mark in the scriptures,
we get a portrait of a man who was one zealous for promoting the good news
in the worldwide field and to happy to serve others.
This alone is worthy of our imitation.
But there is more.
In your future, you may be the object caught up in a Paul and Barnabas moment.
You may face changed circumstances due to health or family issues.
You may be the one who has to work in the shadow of Timothy.
A door may close for you or be closed for you.
But like Mark, do not be so concerned about lost privileges
that you fail to appreciate the opportunities that are right in front of you.
May you, like Mark, keep your heart and your hands strong.
Keep them on the oars.
Work in unison, cooperate with your brothers and sisters for the master.
May you, like Mark, be the underroer.